The Project Gutenberg EBook of Going-to-the-Sun, by Vachel Lindsay

This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere in the United States
and most other parts of the world at no cost and with almost no
restrictions whatsoever.  You may copy it, give it away or re-use it
under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License included with this
eBook or online at www.gutenberg.org.  If you are not
located in the United States, you'll have to check the laws of the
country where you are located before using this ebook.


Title: Going-to-the-Sun

Author: Vachel Lindsay

Release Date: October 26, 2020 [EBook #63554]

Language: English

Character set encoding: UTF-8

*** START OF THIS PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK GOING-TO-THE-SUN ***




Produced by Tim Lindell, Chuck Greif and the Online
Distributed Proofreading Team at https://www.pgdp.net (This
file was produced from images generously made available
by The Internet Archive/American Libraries.)







                            [Illustration]



                           GOING-TO-THE-SUN




                           GOING-TO-THE-SUN

                                  BY
                            VACHEL LINDSAY

                   AUTHOR OF “GENERAL WILLIAM BOOTH
                   ENTERS HEAVEN,” “THE CONGO,” ETC.

                       [Illustration: colophon]

                        D. APPLETON AND COMPANY
                    NEW YORK :: LONDON :: MCMXXIII

                            [Illustration]

                          COPYRIGHT, 1923, BY
                        D. APPLETON AND COMPANY


                PRINTED IN THE UNITED STATES OF AMERICA




[Illustration] CONTENTS


PREFACE                                                                1

WE START FOR THE WATERFALLS                                            8

GOING-TO-THE-SUN                                                      10

THE MYSTIC ROOSTER OF THE MONTANA SUNRISE                             12

THE BIRD CALLED “CURIOSITY”                                           14

THE THISTLE VINE                                                      16

AND THEY LAUGHED                                                      18

THE FAIRY CIRCUS                                                      20

THE BATTLE-AX OF THE SUN                                              22

THE CHRISTMAS TREES                                                   24

THE PHEASANT SPEAKS OF HIS BIRTHDAYS                                  26

THE MYSTIC UNICORN OF THE MOUNTAIN SUNSET                             30

JOHNNY APPLESEED STILL FURTHER WEST                                   34

THE APPLE-BARREL OF JOHNNY APPLESEED                                  38

THE COMET OF GOING-TO-THE-SUN                                         40

THE BOAT WITH THE KITE STRING AND THE CELESTIAL
EYES                                                                  42

“SO MUCH THE WORSE FOR BOSTON”                                        50

THE ROCKETS THAT REACHED SATURN                                       72

MEDITATION                                                            74

THE TRAVELER                                                          76

ELIZABETH BARRETT BROWNING                                            78

SOME BALLOONS GROW ON TREES                                           80

BABYLON’S GARDENS ARE BURNING                                         84

IN THE BEAUTY PARLORS                                                 86

A POLITICAL CAMPAIGN                                                  88

OLD JUDGE HOOT OWL                                                    90

PEARLS                                                                92

THE LAND HORSE AND THE SEA HORSE                                      94

CONCERNING THE MOUSE WITH TWO TAILS                                   98

WORDS ABOUT AN ANCIENT QUEEN                                         100

[Illustration]




[Illustration] ILLUSTRATIONS


Elements of Good Tea                                                   1

We Start for the Waterfalls                                            9

Going-To-The-Sun                                                      11

The Mystic Rooster of the Montana Sunrise                             13

The Bird Called “Curiosity”                                           15

The Thistle Vine                                                      17

And They Laughed (Poppies)                                            19

The Fairy Circus                                                      21

The Battle-Ax of the Sun                                              23

The Christmas Trees                                                   25

The Pheasant Speaks of His Birthdays                                  27

The Mystic Unicorn of the Montana Sunset                              31

Johnny Appleseed Still Further West                                   35

And Fairies Came from Them                                            37

The Apple-Barrel of Johnny Appleseed                                  39

The Comet of Going-To-The-Sun                                         41

The Boat with the Kite String and the Celestial Eyes                  43

The Big-Eared Rat of Boston                                           51

The Boston Mouse                                                      53

The Tower-of-Babel Cactus                                             55

A Back-Bay Whale                                                      59

The Bat                                                               65

Rockets on the Way to Saturn                                          71

Rockets in Saturn                                                     73

Meditation                                                            75

The Moon is a Devil-Jester                                            77

Elizabeth Barrett Browning                                            79

Some Balloons Grow on Trees                                           81

Babylon’s Gardens are Burning                                         85

The Ape Rode the Jumbo                                                87

A Political Campaign                                                  89

Old Judge Hoot Owl                                                    91

Pearls                                                                93

The Land Horse                                                        95

The Sea Horse                                                         97

Concerning the Mouse with Two Tails                                   99

Words about an Ancient Queen                                         101

[Illustration]




[Illustration] GOING-TO-THE-SUN




[Illustration] THE ELEMENTS OF GOOD TEA


This book is a sequel and a reply to a book by Stephen Graham,
explorer-poet, and Vernon Hill, artist.

I had a splendid six weeks tramping with my lifetime friend, Stephen
Graham, in the Rockies. We climbed northwest through Glacier Park,
Montana, across the Canadian line into Alberta, Canada. There it is in
two sentences.

It would take more than the _Encyclopædia Britannica_ to tell on how
many points I differ from Stephen, and on how many points I agree with
him. I had not the least idea that so much Lindsay was going into
Graham’s fireside notes--while I was asleep at noon, often recovering in
an hour from ten hours of restless, sleepless freezing by night. I do
not hold myself liable in court for any opinions of mine then recorded
by Graham. My daytime strength was not all given to thought, however,
but often to trying to keep Graham in sight when he was a quarter of a
mile ahead of me climbing mountains absolutely perpendicular. As I
remember our first fireside discussions, they were as to whether there
was actually such a person as Patrick Henry. Graham had an idea he was a
perverse invention of my own fancy. But he looked him up afterwards and
found there was such a man. As I remember our conversations after that
provocation, I kept trying to deliver to him from memory Bryce’s
_American Commonwealth_, unabridged, two volumes, one thousand pages
each. I remember those volumes well. I read every page in lonely country
hotels and on slow local trains while a Sunday field-worker for the
Anti-Saloon League. And now invisible leaves of Bryce often made the
chief ingredient of our tea. So I have indicated in the design.

I did not tell Graham I was quoting the great ambassador, and so many
unsupported, heavy and formidable statements he quite properly hesitated
to write out, without further confirmation, though he drank them down
quite cheerfully. In the great blank spaces in Graham’s narrative where
he skips really splendid scenery, I was quoting Bryce--not always
singing hymns!

The most authentic part of my book, the part Mr. Vernon Hill has left
out, is that the mountains were as steep as I have drawn them. His
mountains, otherwise quite correct, are not sufficiently perpendicular.
Vernon Hill, of course, was not physically with us on the expedition. He
was in London, drawing beautiful and famous Arcadian Calendars. When
later he came to illustrate Graham’s book in London, with Graham bending
over him, no one mentioned the fact that the mountains were all like
church steeples. Graham had not noticed it, and it did not occur to
Vernon Hill by wireless. Otherwise Vernon Hill was in excellent
communication with us, and every picture in Graham’s book expresses
exactly what Graham was talking to me about to make me forget the
tumbles and the briers, and to drown out the Bryce.

After I had hunted for years and years to find an explorer-poet who
would take a long walk with me, and had scared every one off by the
elaborateness of the proposal, the first troubadour that took me up on
it almost broke my neck. It was a grand and awful time. The sensible
reviews of Graham’s book have been by Walter Prichard Eaton. He does not
discuss Graham’s opinions or mine. But he is very plain about the fact
that we almost slid into eternity. He has tried those mountains himself,
and he knows. He should write several more reviews.

Stephen Graham is a lifetime friend, and I have assembled these drawings
as a sign thereof. But because I have been studying Hieroglyphics in the
Metropolitan Museum all this summer, and because United States
Hieroglyphics of my own invention are haunting me day and night, this
book is drawn, and not written. I serve notice on the critics--the
verses are most incidental, merely to explain the pictures. And so,
directly considered, it is much more a reply to Vernon Hill, the artist,
than to Stephen.

The artist of the Arcadian Calendar discerned rightly. Graham and I
were in Arcady, even if it was a bit rough.

Going-To-The-Sun Mountain is the very jewel of the mountains of Glacier
Park. All the tourists love it, and they are right. Its name fits it.

Going-To-The-Sun Mountain is our American Fujiyama, as all testify who
have seen it.

Obviously, an ingredient of good tea is talk on Egyptian Hieroglyphics.
I had an invisible copy of an Egyptian Grammar with me and I put a leaf
from it into every pot of tea. Graham did not take to the taste of it as
much as he did to the pages of Bryce, but he was nobly patient, as one
may say, with Egypt.

The Hieroglyphics in this work are based on two more British-Egyptian
grammars he sent me after he reached London. Still, they may be
described as United States Hieroglyphics, and almost any Egyptologist
will be willing to describe them that way, having about as much to do
with Egypt as Egyptian cigarettes. The Egyptians were, briefly, a nation
of Vernon Hills, who drew their “Arcadian Calendar” for four thousand
years in red and black ink, or cut it in granite. _I keep thinking about
them!_ A free translation of the hieroglyphic inscription at the bottom
of the first picture following is:

  +-----------------------------------------------+
  | _The beating heart of the waterfall of the    |
  | double truth, as it appears to a scribe,      |
  | a servant of Thoth--Thoth, who is god of      |
  | picture-writing, photoplays and hieroglyphics,|
  | and an intense admirer of waterfalls._        |
  +-----------------------------------------------+


With this start, the reader can go straight through the book without a
mistake.

Now, a last word as to the seal, _The Elements of Good Tea_.

On the southern side of the Canadian-United States boundary, just as we
reached it, our coffee gave out. Most symbolical happening! There in the
deep woods, as we passed to the northern side, Graham said with a sigh
of insatiable anticipation: “Now we will have some tea.” We had had tea
all along, alternated with coffee. But now Stephen, on his own heath,
was emphatic about it. So he made tea, a whole potful, with a kick like
a battering ram, and I drank my half.

Certainly the most worth-while thing in Stephen’s book, and mine, is a
matter known to all men long before the books were written. That is,
that a Britisher and a United Stateser can cross the Canadian-American
line together and discover that it is hardly there; can discover that an
international boundary can be genuine and eternal and yet friendly. If
there is one thing on which Stephen and I will agree till the Judgment
Day, it is that all the boundaries in the world should be as open, and
as happy, as the Canadian-United States line. To many diplomats such a
boundary is incredible, and yet it exists, one of the longest in the
world.

                                                         VACHEL LINDSAY




WE START WEST FOR THE WATERFALLS


    Tricking us, making our hearts their prey,
    The dreams of the dreams, with books of the dreams,
    Haunt the homes of the town this day;
    The visions of rivers, with rhymes of the waterfalls,
    Haunt the yards of the town this day;
    The fairies of the fairies, with the flowers of the fairies,
    Haunt the factories of the town this day;
    And we throw them kisses, and they fly away.

    Tricking us, making our hearts their prey,
    The angels of the angels, with the flags of the angels,
    Haunt the clouds above the town this day,
    And we throw them kisses and they fly away.
    And they call us west to the glacial mountains,
    To the mines that are books, to the natural fountains.

[Illustration]




GOING-TO-THE-SUN


    The mountain peak called “Going-To-The-Sun,”
    In Glacier Park,
    Is the most gorgeous one,
    And when the sun comes down to it, it glows
    With emerald and rose.

[Illustration]




THE MYSTIC ROOSTER OF THE MONTANA SUNRISE


    On the mountain peak, called “Going-To-The-Sun,”
    I saw the rooster that no storm can tame,
    The center of the sun was but his eye,
    His comb was but the sun rays and the flame.
    There in the Glacier Park, above white glaciers,
    There, above Montana and the west,
    He crowed and called his boast around the world,
    Emotion shook his red embroidered vest.
    There is humor in the very biggest rooster,
    But even more magnificence than fun.
    I laugh because he acted like a rooster,
    I am solemn, for he was the biggest one.
    I like a rooster or a turkey gobbler,
    I like their forthright impudence at times.
    They are neither larks, nor trilling nightingales,
    And yet they always sing in splendid rhymes.
    When I heard the vast bird of the sunrise crying,
    The world held not one inch of silly prose.
    Any rooster is a flowerlike fowl,
    And this one was a crimson Yankee rose.

[Illustration]




THE BIRD CALLED “CURIOSITY”


    Round the mountain peak called “Going-To-The-Sun,”
    In Glacier Park, a steep and soaring one,
    Circled a curious bird with pointed nose
    Who led us on to every cave, and rose
    And swept through every cloud, then brought us berries,
    And all the acid gifts the mountain carries,
    And let us guess which ones were good to eat.
    And even when we slept his sharp wings beat
    The weary fire, or shook the tree-top cones,
    Or rattled dead twigs like a fairy’s bones.
    The vulgar bird, “Curiosity”! When we
    Were tired, and lean, and shaking at the knee,
    We put this bird in harness. He was strong
    As any ostrich, pulled our packs along,
    Helped us up over the next annoying wall,
    And dragged us to the chalet, and the tourists’ resting hall.

    And when once more we were young, well-fed men,
    He beat the door to call us forth again.

[Illustration]




THE THISTLEVINE


    The Thistlevine saw the butterflies
    Disappear through the morning skies.

[Illustration]




AND THEY LAUGHED


    By the mountain peak, called “Going-To-The-Sun,”
    A dizzy mountain, where paths twist round and round
    And nothing in sober order can be found--
    I asked the poppies: “What fairies do you see?”
    And they shook their long stems, and they laughed at me.

[Illustration:

AND
THEY
LAUGHED

VACHEL LINDSAY 1922]

[Illustration]




THE FAIRY CIRCUS


    A fairy ran a circus
      With a pigeon puffed and proud,
    A humble bullfrog
      And a rather solid cloud.

    She wore her underwear,
      The rest wore what they had,
    The frog wore a blue coat
      Just like his dad.

    The pigeon wore his feathers
      And spread himself--O My!
    The cloud wore sunshine
      He gathered in the sky.

[Illustration]




THE BATTLE-AX OF THE SUN


    On the mountain peak I reached the drift
    And I took it for a Christmas gift,
    And I made ten soldiers out of snow.

    But the battle-ax of my fairy foe
    Cut to the ground my men of snow.

    And who was he, my fairy foe,
    Who brought my snowy army low?

    The mountain sun was my fairy foe.

[Illustration: THE BATTLE-AX OF THE SUN]

[Illustration]




THE CHRISTMAS TREES


    On the high slope of Going-To-The-Sun
    Is a stormy Christmas, all year round,
    And snow-filled Christmas trees abound.

[Illustration: VACHEL LINDSAY, 1922]

[Illustration]




THE PHEASANT SPEAKS OF HIS BIRTHDAYS


    Up the good slope of Going-To-The-Sun,
    I saw the Pheasant-Of-The-Sunrise fly.
    Jewels in his feathers, mixed with dew.
    Dew and jewels made his jeweled eye.
    He paused to make a sonnet, which he sang,
    Though nowhere else are pheasants sonneteers.
    He emphasized with swooping and with skipping,
    With winkings and intoxicated leers.
    And how the bushes twinkled as he caroled:

    “Each morning is another birthday, friend.
    And I have lived so many happy birthdays!
    There are gifts with all the suns that here ascend!
    Each bush, you see, has an unextinguished candle
    And angel-food, and icing, and candy flowers,
    And this long vine that climbs from earth to heaven
    Gives me thoughts, and most erratic powers.
    I eat its scarlet berries and its frosting.
    If I choose, it is my present every day.
    Then I can fly straight up to heaven’s doorstep
    Following the green line all the way.

[Illustration]

    “And then I tumble like a limber leaf
    To my nest here, and another year is done
    Or another thousand years, what does it matter
    On the mountain peak called ‘Going-To-The-Sun’?”




THE MYSTIC UNICORN OF THE MONTANA SUNSET


    On the mountain peak, called “Going-To-The-Sun,”
    I saw the Unicorn-No-Storm-Can-Tame.
    The center of the sun was but his eye,
    His mane was but the sun rays and the flame.
    There in that Glacier Park, above green pastures,
    There above Stephen’s camp fire in the rocks,
    He foamed and pawed and whinnied round the world,
    His feathered sides and plumes and bristling locks
    Seemed but the banners of a great announcement
    That unicorns were spry as heretofore,
    That not a camp fire of the world was dead,
    That dragons lived in them, and thousands more
    Camp-born, were clawing at the clouds of Asia,
    Were rising with to-morrow’s dawn for men,
    Camp-fire dragons, with the ancient unicorn
    Bringing the Rosicrucian days again.
    Any unicorn can drive away
    Any thoughts the grown-up race has spoiled.
    When I heard the Unicorn-of-Sunset ramping
    New fancies in my veins bubbled and boiled.

[Illustration]

    Any unicorn is worth his oats,
    And so we fed him bacon, and we made
    An extra cup of tea, which he drank.
    Then he curled up coltwise, and in slumber sank.
    Dragons sprang up, next day, where he had stayed.
    They were in Fujiyama silks arrayed,
    Or spoke of Everest to Stephen. Then began
    Discussing the strange peak in Darien
    That poets climb to see the Pacific well.
    How Stephen climbed it later, I will let him tell.
    Following the Unicorn-No-Storm-Can-Tame
    Alone, in tropic woods, is a great game.




JOHNNY APPLESEED STILL FURTHER WEST


    On the mountain peak, called “Going-To-The-Sun,”
    I saw old Johnny Appleseed once more.
    He ate an apple, threw away the core.
    Then turned and smiled and slackly watched it fall
    Into a crevice of the mountain wall.
    In an instant there was an apple tree,
    The roots split up the rocks beneath our feet,
    And apples rolled down the green mountainside
    And fairies popped from them, flying and free!

[Illustration]

And
Fairies
Came from them.

[Illustration]




THE APPLE-BARREL OF JOHNNY APPLESEED


    On the mountain peak, called “Going-To-The-Sun,”
    I saw gray Johnny Appleseed at prayer
    Just as the sunset made the old earth fair.
    Then darkness came; in an instant, like great smoke,
    The sun fell down as though its great hoops broke
    And dark rich apples, poured from the dim flame
    Where the sun set, came rolling toward the peak,
    A storm of fruit, a mighty cider-reek,
    The perfume of the orchards of the world,
    From apple-shadows: red and russet domes
    That turned to clouds of glory and strange homes
    Above the mountain tops for cloud-born souls:--
    Reproofs for men who build the world like moles,
    Models for men, if they would build the world
    As Johnny Appleseed would have it done--
    Praying, and reading the books of Swedenborg
    On the mountain top called “Going-To-The-Sun.”

[Illustration]




THE COMET OF GOING-TO-THE-SUN


    On the mountain peak, called “Going-To-The-Sun,”
    A comet stopped to drink from a cool spring
    And like a spirit-harp began to sing
    To us, then hurried on to reach the sun.
    We called him “Homer’s soul,” and “Milton’s wing.”
    The harp-sound stayed, though he went up and on.
    It turned to thunder, when he had quite gone--
    And yet was like a soft voice of the sea,
    And every whispering root and every blade of grass
    And every tree
    In the whole world, and brought thoughts of old songs
    That blind men sang ten thousand years ago,
    And all the springtime hearts of every nation know.

[Illustration]




THE BOAT WITH THE KITE STRING AND THE CELESTIAL EYES


    On the mountain peak, called “Going-To-The-Sun,”
    I sat alone; while Stephen explored higher,
    I dragged in sticks and logs and kept our fire.

    On soft-winged sails of meditation
    My boat of spiral shells and flowers,
    And fluffy clouds and twinkling hours,
    My thought-boat went with the sun all day
    Over the glaciers, far away.
    I sat alone, but the chipmunks knew
    My boat was high, and plain to view.

    I flew my ship like a kite. The thread
    Was a cobweb silk, fine and thin,
    That came from out the palm of my hand.
    There I saw the ship begin.
    From the gypsy’s life line thence it came

    A feather of mist that flew to the dawn,
    And I felt the spool in my wrist unwind,
    And I saw the feather on heaven’s lawn,
    Now a glimmering ship like a lark awake.
    And the kite string sang, but did not break.

[Illustration]

    It stretched like the string of a violin
    Played by invisible tides and waves.
    It sang of Springfield yet to be.
    It sang of the dead hours in their graves.

    And of the United States to be,
    And of all the map stretched out below.
    And my kite had pansy eyes in its wings,
    And I saw the states in their bloom and glow
    Yet a child’s block-map, and nothing more,
    Flat patterns on a playroom floor.

    Texas the fort, by the river to the south,
    Michigan a pheasant with a leaf in its mouth,
    Illinois an ear of corn, in the shock,
    Maine a moose-horn, gray as a rock.
    California a whale, in gilded mail,
    Montana, a ranch of alfalfa and clover,

    Montana with its mountain called “Going-To-The-Sun,”
    An outdoor temple for the singer and the rover,
    Wyoming a range for a summer lark,
    With sparkling trails, and its Yellowstone Park,
    Colorado an Indian tent for the world,
    Where the smokes of care-free camps are curled,
    Arizona a mission in the desert for all time,
    Where the nerves find peace, and thoughts find rhyme,
    New Mexico a clay pueblo full of dreams,
    Eldorado in its valleys, ghosts by its streams.
    Utah a throne for a grandeur unknown,
    For haughty hearts, with ways of their own.
    Nevada the cabin of Mark Twain in his youth,
    Where he mined in the cañons, where he dug for the truth.
    Washington a western soldier’s tent,
    Idaho a chair for a president,
    North and South Dakota, one buffalo hide,
    Oregon a lumber mill on a mountain side,
    Nebraska, Oklahoma, cowboy pistols pointing west
    Kansas a wheat field where I, once, was a guest,
    Iowa a corn pone sizzling hot,
    Minnesota a farmer’s coffee-pot.
    Arkansas a steamboat at Mark Twain’s door,
    Missouri Mark Twain’s raft on the shore.
    Louisiana a cavalier’s boot, just the thing
    When we wade toward the mouth of the delta in the spring.
    Mississippi a cotton scales,
    Alabama many cotton bales,
    Georgia a peach-basket red,
    Florida a wild turkey’s head,
    North Carolina a crane, flying through a cloud,
    South Carolina a soldier, with head unbowed,
    West Virginia, the raccoon, shrewd and slow,
    Tennessee Bob Taylor’s fiddle and bow,
    Virginia Thomas Jefferson’s mountain and shroud,
    Kentucky the log cradle of the proud.
    Maryland a plow, Delaware a pruning hook,
    Indiana Riley’s Hoosier book,
    Wisconsin a caldron, cool it who can,
    Ohio Johnny Appleseed’s park for man.
    Vermont a poet’s house, with waterfall and fern,
    Where Frost writes songs that the world will learn.

    New Jersey the doorstep of the nation,
    Pennsylvania the front room of the nation,
    Where once Penn welcomed all creation
    And let them sleep on the grassy floor
    And let them eat the wild berries and explore.
    Rhode Island, Roger Williams’ holy place,
    Connecticut, an arbor of innocence and grace
    Filled with flowers, and souls like lace,
    Especially one little girl six years young
    Who tells me stories in the fairy tongue.

    New Hampshire the mast of the Mayflower,
    Massachusetts the prow of the Mayflower,
    Most famous ark forevermore.

    The whole map a temple, if we patiently read,
    With the statue of Liberty in majesty to plead
    For Arcady to come once more,
    And with New York on guard,
    New York a sentinel,
    New York a lion by the door.

    By my camp fire I grew older,
    There were chipmunks on my shoulder,
    While I saw the world,
    With the eyes of my boat,
    As one land,
    With Asia and Alaska by the ice bound as one,
    The Aurora Borealis was a cross bright as the sun.
    I seemed to live through myriad days.
    My eyes looked down like searching rays.
    I took my flight over many races,
    I saw, in my thought, all human faces.
    And my spirit had its fill.
    And the thread in my wrist wound in again
    The cobweb shortened, strand on strand,
    And my little ship came back to land
    And was only a feather in my hand.




SO MUCH THE WORSE FOR BOSTON


[Sidenote:

_Some words about singing this song,
Are written this border along._]

    I read the aspens like a book, and every leaf was signed,
    And I climbed above the aspen-grove to read what I could find
    On Mount Clinton, Colorado, I met a mountain-cat.
    I will call him “Andrew Jackson,” and I mean no harm by that.
    He was growling, and devouring a terrific mountain-rat.
    But when the feast was ended, the mountain-cat was kind,
    And showed a pretty smile, and spoke his mind.
    “I am dreaming of old Boston,” he said, and wiped his jaws.

[Illustration: THE BIG EARED RAT OF BOSTON]

    “I have often HEARD of Boston,” and he folded in his paws,
    “Boston, Massachusetts, a mountain bold and great.
    I will tell you all about it, if you care to curl and wait.

[Sidenote:

_If I cannot sing in the aspens’ tongue,
If I know not what they say,
Then I have never gone to school,
And have wasted all my day._]

    “In the Boston of my beauty-sleep, when storm-flowers are in bloom,
    When storm-lilies and storm-thistles and storm-roses are in bloom,
    The faithful cats go creeping through the catnip-ferns,
    _And_ rainbows, _and_ sunshine, _and_ gloom,
    And pounce upon the Boston Mice, that tremble underneath the flowers,
    And pounce upon the big-eared rats, and drag them to the tomb.
    For we are Tom-policemen, vigilant and sure.
    We keep the Back Bay ditches and potato cellars pure.
    Apples are not bitten into, cheese is let alone.

[Illustration: VACHEL LINDSAY 1922

THE BOSTON MOUSE WAITS IN TERROR OF THE MOUNTAIN-CAT, UNDER THE SHADOW
OF THE STORM-ROSE]

[Sidenote:

_Come, let us whisper of men and beasts
And joke as the aspens do,
And yet be solemn in their way,
And tell our thoughts
All summer through,
In the morning,
In the frost,
And in the midnight dew._]

    Sweet corn is left upon the cob, and the beef left on the bone.
    Every Sunday morning, the Pilgrims give us codfish balls,
    Because we keep the poisonous rats from the Boston halls.”
    And then I contradicted him, in a manner firm and flat.
    “I have never seen, in the famous Hub, suppression of the rat.”
    “So much the worse for Boston,” said the whiskery mountain-cat.

    And the cat continued his great dream, closing one shrewd eye:
    “The Tower-of-Babel Cactus blazes above the sky.
    Fangs and sabers guard the buds and crimson fruits on high.
    Yet cactus-eating eagles and black hawks hum through the air.
    When the pigeons weep in Copley Square, look up, those wings are there,

[Illustration: VACHEL LINDSAY 1922

THE TOWER-OF-BABEL CACTUS BLAZES ABOVE THE SKY]

[Sidenote:

_The mountain-cat seems violent,
And of no good intent.
Yet read his words so gently
No bird will leave its tree,
No child will hate the simper or the noise
And hurry away from you and me.
Read like a meditative, catlike willow-tree._]

[Sidenote:

_Some words about singing this song,
Are scattered this border along._]

    Proud Yankee birds of prey, overshadowing the land,
    Screaming to younger Yankees of the self-same brand,
    Whose talk is like the American flag, snapping on the summit-pole,
    Sky-rocket and star-spangled words, round sunflower words,
        they use them whole.
    There are no tailors in command, men seem like trees in honest leaves.
    Their clothes are but their bark and hide, and sod and binding
        for their sheaves.
    Men are as the shocks of corn, as natural as alfalfa fields.
    And no one yields to purse or badge; only to sweating manhood yields,
    To natural authority, to wisdom straight from the new sun.
    Who is the bull-god of the herd? The strongest and the shaggiest one.
    Or if they preen at all, they preen with Walter Raleigh’s
        gracious pride:--
    The forest-ranger! One grand show! With gun and spade slung at his side!
    Up on the dizzy timber-line, arbiter of life and fate,
    Where sacred frost shines all the year, and freezing bee
        and mossflower mate.

[Sidenote:

_Read like the Mariposa with the stately stem,
With green jade leaves like ripples and like waves,
And white jade petals,
Smooth as foam can be--
The Mariposa lily, that is leaning upon the young stream’s hem,
Speaking grandly to that larger flower
That grows down toward the sea, hour after hour
Hunting for the Pacific storms and caves._]

    “Boston is tough country, and the ranger rides with death,
    Plunges to stop the forest fire against the black smoke’s breath,
    Buries the cattle killed by eating larkspur lush and blue,
    Shoots the calf-thieves, lumber-thieves, and gets train-robbers too.

[Sidenote:

_Some words about singing this song,
Are scattered this border along._]

    Governor and Sheriff obey his ordering hand,
    Following his ostrich plume across the amber sand.
    “But often, for lone days he goes, exploring cliffs afar,
    And chants his King James’ Bible to tarantula and star.
    I hear him read Egyptian tales, as he rides by in the dawn.
    I am sometimes an Egyptian cat. My crudities are gone.
    He spells, in Greek, that Homer, as he hurries on alone.
    I hear him scan at Virgil, as I hide behind a stone.
    “He had kept me fond of Hawthorne, and Thoreau, cold and wise.
    The silvery waves of Walden Pond, gleam in a bobcat’s eyes.
    He has taught us grateful beasts to sing, like Orpheus of old.
    The Boston forest ranger brings back the Age of Gold.”

    And then I contradicted him, in a manner firm and flat.

[Illustration: VACHEL LINDSAY 1922

A BACK-BAY WHALE]

    “I have never heard, in the cultured Hub, of rowdy men like that.”
    “So much the worse for Boston,” said the Rocky Mountain cat.

[Sidenote:

_Sing like the Mariposa to the stream that seeks the sea,
Speak like that flower,
With still,
Olympian jest,
And cuplike word
Filling the hour._]

    And the cat purred on, in his great dream, as one who
        seeks the noblest ends:--
    “Higher than the Back Bay whales, that spout and leap,
        and bite their friends,
    Higher than those Moby-Dicks, the Boston Lover’s trail ascends.
    Higher than the Methodist, or Unitarian spire,
    Beyond the range of any fence of bowlder or barbed wire,
    Telling to each other what the Boston Boys have done,
    The lodge-pole pines go towering to the timber-line and sun.
    And their whisper stirs love’s fury in each pantherish girl-child,
    Till she dresses like a columbine, or a bleeding heart gone wild.
    Like a harebell, golden aster, bluebell, Indian arrow,
    Blue jay, squirrel, meadow lark, loco, mountain sparrow.
    Mayflower, sagebrush, dying swan, they court in disarray.
    The masquerade, in Love’s hot name, is like a forest-play.
    And she is held in worship who adores the noblest boys.
    So miner-lovers bring her new amazing pets and toys.
    Mewing, prowling hunters bring her grizzlies in chains.
    Ranchers bring red apples through the silver rains.
    In the mountain of my beauty-sleep, when storm-flowers
    Are in bloom,
    The Boston of my beauty-sleep, when storm-flowers
    Are in bloom.
    There are just such naked waterfalls, as are roaring there below.
    For the springs of Boston Common are from priceless summer snow.
    Serene the wind-cleared Boston peaks, and there white rabbits run
    Like funny giant snowflakes, hopping in the sun.
    The ptarmigan will leap and fly and clutter through the drift
    And the baby ptarmigans ‘peep, peep,’ when the weasel eyelids lift.
    And where the pools are still and deep, dwarf willows see themselves,
    And the Boston Mariposas bend, like mirror-kissing elves.
    White is the gypsum cliff, and white the snowbird’s warm,
        deep-feathered home,
    White are the cottonwood and birch, white is the fountain-foam.

    “In the waterfalls from the sunburnt cliffs, the bold
        nymphs leap and shriek
    The wrath of the water makes them fight, its kisses make them weak.

    With shoulders hot with sunburn, with bodies rose and white,
    And streaming curls like sunrise rays, or curls like flags of night,
    Flowing to their dancing feet, circling them in storm,
    And their adorers glory in each lean, Ionic form.
    Oh, the hearts of women, then set free. They live the life of old
    That chickadees and bobcats sing, the famous Age of Gold....
    They sleep and star-gaze on the grass, their red-ore camp fires shine,
    Like heaps of unset rubies spilled on velvet superfine.
    And love of man and maid is when the granite weds the snow-white stream.
    The ranch house bursts with babies. In the wood-lot deep eyes gleam,
    Buffalo children, barking wolves, fuming cinnamon bears.
    Human mustangs kick the paint from the breakfast-table chairs.”

    And then I contradicted him, in a manner firm and flat.
    “I have never heard, in the modest Hub, of a stock ill-bred as that.”
    “So much the worse for Boston,” said the lecherous mountain-cat.

    And the cat continued with the dream, as the snow blew round in drifts.
    “The caves beneath the craggy sides of Boston hold tremendous gifts
    For many youths that enter there, and lift up every stone that lifts.
    They wander in, and wander on, finding all new things they can,
    Some forms of jade or chrysoprase, more rare than radium for man.
    And the burro trains, to fetch the loot, are jolly fool parades.
    The burros flap their ears and bray, and take the steepest grades.
    Or loaded with long mining-drills, and railroad rails,
        and boards for flumes,
    Up Beacon Hill with fossil bats, swine bones from geologic tombs,
    Or loaded with cliff-mummies of lost dwellers of the land.
    Explorers’ yells and bridle bells sound above the sand.

    “In the desert of my beauty-sleep, when rainflowers
    Will not bloom,
    In the Boston of my beauty-sleep, when storms
    Will not bloom,

[Illustration: VACHEL LINDSAY 1922

THE BAT]

    By Bunker Hill’s tall obelisk, till the August sun awakes,
    I brood and stalk blue shadows, and my mad heart breaks.
    Thoughts of a hunt unutterable ring the obelisk around.
    And a thousand glorious sphinxes spring, singing, from the ground.
    Very white young Salem witches ride them down the west.
    The gravel makes a flat, lone track, the eye has endless rest.
    Fair girls and beasts charge, dreaming, through the
        salt-sand white as snow,
    Hunting the three-toed pony, while mysterious slaughters flow.
    And the bat from the salt desert sucks the clouds on high
    Until they fall in ashes, and all the sky is dry.
    Oh, the empty Spanish Missions, where the bells ring without hand,
    As we drive the shadowy dinosaurs and mammoths through the sand.”

    And then I contradicted him, in a manner firm and flat.
    “I have never seen, in the sun-kissed Hub, circuses like that.”
    “So much the worse for you, my cub,” said the slant-eyed mountain-cat.

    And the cat continued with his yarn, while I stood there marveling:--
    “I here proclaim that I am not a vague, an abstract thing.
    I like to eat the turkey-leg, the lamb, the chickenwing.
    Yet the cat that knows not fasting, the cat that knows not dream,
    That has not drunk dim mammoth-blood from the long-dead desert stream,
    That has not rolled in the alkali-encrusted pits of bones
    By the saber-toothed white tiger’s cave, where he kicked
        the ancient stones,
    Has not known sacred Boston. Our gods are burning ore.
    Our Colorado gods are the stars of heaven’s floor.
    But the god of Massachusetts is a Tiger they adore.

    “From that saber-tooth’s ghost-purring goes the whispered word of power
    In the sunset, in the moonlight, in the purple sunrise hour:--
    That an Indian chief is born, in a teepee, to the west,
    That a school of rattlesnakes is rattling, on the mountain’s breast,
    That an opal has been grubbed from the ground by a mole,
    That a bumble-bee has found a new way to save his soul.
    In Egyptian granite Boston, the rumor has gone round
    That new ways to tame the whirlwind have been marvelously found.
    That a Balanced Rock has fallen, that a battle has been won
    In the soul of some young touch-me-not, some tigerish Emerson.”

    And then I contradicted him, in a manner firm and flat.
    “Boston people do not read their Emerson like that.”
    “So much the worse for Boston,” said the self-reliant cat.
    Then I saw the cat there towering, like a cat cut from a hill:--
    A prophet-beast of Nature’s law, staring with stony will,
    Pacing on the icy top, then stretched in drowsy thought,
    Then, listening, on tiptoe, to the voice the snowwind brought,
    Tearing at the fire-killed pine trees, kittenish again,
    Then speaking like a lion, long made president of men:--
    “There are such holy plains and streams, there are such
        sky-arched spaces,
    There are life-long trails for private lives, and endless
        whispering places.
    Range is so wide there is not room for lust and poison breath
    And flesh may walk in Eden, forgetting shame and death.”

    And then I contradicted him, in a manner firm and flat.
    “I have never heard, in Boston, of anything like that.”
    “_Boston is peculiar._
    _Boston is mysterious._
    _You do not know your Boston_,” said the wise, fastidious cat,
    And turned again to lick the skull of his prey, the mountain-rat!
    And at that, he broke off his wild dream of a perfect human race.
    And I walked down to the aspen grove where is neither time nor place,
    Nor measurement, nor space, except that grass has room
    And aspen leaves whisper on forever in their grace.
    All day they watch along the banks. All night the perfume goes
    From the Mariposa’s chalice to the marble mountain-rose,
    In the Boston of their beauty-sleep, when storm-flowers
    Are in bloom,
    In the mystery of their beauty-sleep, when storm-flowers
    Are in bloom.

[Illustration: ROCKETS ON THE WAY TO SATURN]




THE ROCKETS THAT REACHED SATURN


    On the Fourth of July sky rockets went up
    Over the church and the trees and the town,
    Stripes and stars, riding red cars.
    Each rocket wore a red-white-and-blue gown,
    And I did not see one rocket come down.

    Next day on the hill I found dead sticks,
    Scorched like blown-out candle-wicks.

    But where are the rockets? Up in the sky.
    As for the sticks, let them lie.
    Dead sticks are not the Fourth of July.

    In Saturn they grow like wonderful weeds,
    In some ways like weeds of ours,
    Twisted and beautiful, straight and awry,
    But nodding all day to the heavenly powers.
    The stalks are smoke,
    And the blossoms green light,
    And crystalline fireworks flowers.

[Illustration: VACHEL LINDSAY 1922

ROCKETS IN SATURN]




MEDITATION


    A spirit in soft slippers
    Walked the Gulf Stream floor.
    She opened many a cabin door
    Of ships a long time underseas.
    She read long-rest Egyptian books
    And looked upon skull-faces,
    And read their restless looks
    Shining through the shadows
    Of phosphorescent streaming waves,--
    Impatient for the Judgment horn
    To lift them from their purple graves.

[Illustration]




THE TRAVELER


    The Moon’s a devil-jester
      Who makes himself too free.
    The rascal is not always
      Where he appears to be:--
    Sometimes he is in my heart--
      Sometimes in the sea.
    Then tides are in my heart,
      And tides are in the sea.
    O traveler! abiding not
      Where he pretends to be!

[Illustration: THE MOON IS A DEVIL-JESTER

VACHEL LINDSAY 1922]




ELIZABETH BARRETT BROWNING


    Elizabeth Barrett Browning
    Sat gossiping with Robert.
    (She was really a raving beauty in her day.
    With Mary Pickford curls in clouds and whirls.)
    She was trying to think of something nice to say,
    So she pointed to a page by her fellow star and sage,
    And said: “I wish that _I_ could write that way!”

[Illustration]




SOME BALLOONS GROW ON TREES

FOR BETSY RICHARDS


    Some balloons grow on trees,
    On rubber trees, indeed.
    You plant old rubber-boots for seed.

    Some balloons grow on trees.
    If you want them red,
    You pour red ink into the boots,
    There in the balloon bed,

    And blue ink if you want them blue.
    But if you desire them green,
    Just let it pass.
    They will turn green to match the grass.

    Some balloons grow on trees.
    And if you do not spray them soon
    With water-pots of hellebore
    You will not have
    One ripe balloon.
    Mosquitoes will bite them in the night
    Explode them like a thunder-storm
    And give the town a fright.

[Illustration]

    Some balloons grow on trees.
    If they grow too fast
    And are not gathered every day
    The infants stand aghast
    To see them tear up by the roots
    The trees on which they grew
    And scatter dirt on the front walk
    And disappear from view
    Into the blue.




BABYLON’S GARDENS ARE BURNING


    There, on the shores of the river Euphrates,
    Babylon’s gardens are burning this morning.
    Prophets warned,
    Prophets prophesied,
    But no one in Babylon heeded the warning.

[Illustration: BABYLON’S GARDENS ARE BURNING

VACHEL LINDSAY 1922]

[Illustration]




IN THE BEAUTY PARLORS


    A jumbo so vain, and fond of his shape
    Had himself beautified by a gray ape,
    Tattooed and gilded with elegant signs,
    The latest and merriest monkey designs.
    Then the ape rode the jumbo
    And made the land gape,
    As he sat at his ease in the elephant chair.
    He had tattooed himself with designs from a shawl,
    And he gathered a grape with a self-possessed air,
    And threw down a twig at another fine ape.

[Illustration: VACHEL LINDSAY 1922

THE APE RODE THE JUMBO]

[Illustration]




A POLITICAL CAMPAIGN


    A duck within the harem of a drake who ran for president
    Swam in his parade, and made it an event.
    She carried a big card of his footprints and she said:--
    “He waddles like an arrow, straight ahead.”

[Illustration]




OLD JUDGE HOOT OWL


    Old Judge Hoot Owl sits by his inkwell
    Writing wills for the wealthy and swell.
    He knows something he won’t tell.
    Three little house flies, drowned in his inkwell.
    Three little scandals in a peanut shell.

[Illustration]




PEARLS


    Now she was fond of jewelry,
    The Lady-of-Fiddle-Dee-Dee,
    So she built her house
    Near an oyster bed,
    Where the pearls were almost free.

[Illustration]




THE LAND HORSE AND THE SEA HORSE


    The Land Horse
    Everybody rides,
    Until his eyes are dim.

[Illustration: THE LAND HORSE]

[Illustration]

    The Sea Horse!
    Every wave he rides.
      And nobody
    Rides him.

[Illustration: THE SEA HORSE

VACHEL LINDSAY 1922]

[Illustration]




CONCERNING THE MOUSE WITH TWO TAILS


    The cat was astonished
    To see the mouse stand there,
    Waving two tails,
    With a confident air.

[Illustration]




WORDS ABOUT AN ANCIENT QUEEN

INSCRIBED WITH APOLOGIES TO LYTTON STRACHEY


    Queen Hat-shep-sut, pious and fat
    Wore a hair net under her hat.
    Queen Hat-shep-sut, restrained and refined
    Wore a hair net over her mind.

[Illustration]





End of the Project Gutenberg EBook of Going-to-the-Sun, by Vachel Lindsay

*** END OF THIS PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK GOING-TO-THE-SUN ***

***** This file should be named 63554-0.txt or 63554-0.zip *****
This and all associated files of various formats will be found in:
        http://www.gutenberg.org/6/3/5/5/63554/

Produced by Tim Lindell, Chuck Greif and the Online
Distributed Proofreading Team at https://www.pgdp.net (This
file was produced from images generously made available
by The Internet Archive/American Libraries.)

Updated editions will replace the previous one--the old editions will
be renamed.

Creating the works from print editions not protected by U.S. copyright
law means that no one owns a United States copyright in these works,
so the Foundation (and you!) can copy and distribute it in the United
States without permission and without paying copyright
royalties. Special rules, set forth in the General Terms of Use part
of this license, apply to copying and distributing Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works to protect the PROJECT GUTENBERG-tm
concept and trademark. Project Gutenberg is a registered trademark,
and may not be used if you charge for the eBooks, unless you receive
specific permission. If you do not charge anything for copies of this
eBook, complying with the rules is very easy. You may use this eBook
for nearly any purpose such as creation of derivative works, reports,
performances and research. They may be modified and printed and given
away--you may do practically ANYTHING in the United States with eBooks
not protected by U.S. copyright law. Redistribution is subject to the
trademark license, especially commercial redistribution.

START: FULL LICENSE

THE FULL PROJECT GUTENBERG LICENSE
PLEASE READ THIS BEFORE YOU DISTRIBUTE OR USE THIS WORK

To protect the Project Gutenberg-tm mission of promoting the free
distribution of electronic works, by using or distributing this work
(or any other work associated in any way with the phrase "Project
Gutenberg"), you agree to comply with all the terms of the Full
Project Gutenberg-tm License available with this file or online at
www.gutenberg.org/license.

Section 1. General Terms of Use and Redistributing Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works

1.A. By reading or using any part of this Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic work, you indicate that you have read, understand, agree to
and accept all the terms of this license and intellectual property
(trademark/copyright) agreement. If you do not agree to abide by all
the terms of this agreement, you must cease using and return or
destroy all copies of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works in your
possession. If you paid a fee for obtaining a copy of or access to a
Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work and you do not agree to be bound
by the terms of this agreement, you may obtain a refund from the
person or entity to whom you paid the fee as set forth in paragraph
1.E.8.

1.B. "Project Gutenberg" is a registered trademark. It may only be
used on or associated in any way with an electronic work by people who
agree to be bound by the terms of this agreement. There are a few
things that you can do with most Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works
even without complying with the full terms of this agreement. See
paragraph 1.C below. There are a lot of things you can do with Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works if you follow the terms of this
agreement and help preserve free future access to Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic works. See paragraph 1.E below.

1.C. The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation ("the
Foundation" or PGLAF), owns a compilation copyright in the collection
of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works. Nearly all the individual
works in the collection are in the public domain in the United
States. If an individual work is unprotected by copyright law in the
United States and you are located in the United States, we do not
claim a right to prevent you from copying, distributing, performing,
displaying or creating derivative works based on the work as long as
all references to Project Gutenberg are removed. Of course, we hope
that you will support the Project Gutenberg-tm mission of promoting
free access to electronic works by freely sharing Project Gutenberg-tm
works in compliance with the terms of this agreement for keeping the
Project Gutenberg-tm name associated with the work. You can easily
comply with the terms of this agreement by keeping this work in the
same format with its attached full Project Gutenberg-tm License when
you share it without charge with others.

1.D. The copyright laws of the place where you are located also govern
what you can do with this work. Copyright laws in most countries are
in a constant state of change. If you are outside the United States,
check the laws of your country in addition to the terms of this
agreement before downloading, copying, displaying, performing,
distributing or creating derivative works based on this work or any
other Project Gutenberg-tm work. The Foundation makes no
representations concerning the copyright status of any work in any
country outside the United States.

1.E. Unless you have removed all references to Project Gutenberg:

1.E.1. The following sentence, with active links to, or other
immediate access to, the full Project Gutenberg-tm License must appear
prominently whenever any copy of a Project Gutenberg-tm work (any work
on which the phrase "Project Gutenberg" appears, or with which the
phrase "Project Gutenberg" is associated) is accessed, displayed,
performed, viewed, copied or distributed:

  This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere in the United States and
  most other parts of the world at no cost and with almost no
  restrictions whatsoever. You may copy it, give it away or re-use it
  under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License included with this
  eBook or online at www.gutenberg.org. If you are not located in the
  United States, you'll have to check the laws of the country where you
  are located before using this ebook.

1.E.2. If an individual Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work is
derived from texts not protected by U.S. copyright law (does not
contain a notice indicating that it is posted with permission of the
copyright holder), the work can be copied and distributed to anyone in
the United States without paying any fees or charges. If you are
redistributing or providing access to a work with the phrase "Project
Gutenberg" associated with or appearing on the work, you must comply
either with the requirements of paragraphs 1.E.1 through 1.E.7 or
obtain permission for the use of the work and the Project Gutenberg-tm
trademark as set forth in paragraphs 1.E.8 or 1.E.9.

1.E.3. If an individual Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work is posted
with the permission of the copyright holder, your use and distribution
must comply with both paragraphs 1.E.1 through 1.E.7 and any
additional terms imposed by the copyright holder. Additional terms
will be linked to the Project Gutenberg-tm License for all works
posted with the permission of the copyright holder found at the
beginning of this work.

1.E.4. Do not unlink or detach or remove the full Project Gutenberg-tm
License terms from this work, or any files containing a part of this
work or any other work associated with Project Gutenberg-tm.

1.E.5. Do not copy, display, perform, distribute or redistribute this
electronic work, or any part of this electronic work, without
prominently displaying the sentence set forth in paragraph 1.E.1 with
active links or immediate access to the full terms of the Project
Gutenberg-tm License.

1.E.6. You may convert to and distribute this work in any binary,
compressed, marked up, nonproprietary or proprietary form, including
any word processing or hypertext form. However, if you provide access
to or distribute copies of a Project Gutenberg-tm work in a format
other than "Plain Vanilla ASCII" or other format used in the official
version posted on the official Project Gutenberg-tm web site
(www.gutenberg.org), you must, at no additional cost, fee or expense
to the user, provide a copy, a means of exporting a copy, or a means
of obtaining a copy upon request, of the work in its original "Plain
Vanilla ASCII" or other form. Any alternate format must include the
full Project Gutenberg-tm License as specified in paragraph 1.E.1.

1.E.7. Do not charge a fee for access to, viewing, displaying,
performing, copying or distributing any Project Gutenberg-tm works
unless you comply with paragraph 1.E.8 or 1.E.9.

1.E.8. You may charge a reasonable fee for copies of or providing
access to or distributing Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works
provided that

* You pay a royalty fee of 20% of the gross profits you derive from
  the use of Project Gutenberg-tm works calculated using the method
  you already use to calculate your applicable taxes. The fee is owed
  to the owner of the Project Gutenberg-tm trademark, but he has
  agreed to donate royalties under this paragraph to the Project
  Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation. Royalty payments must be paid
  within 60 days following each date on which you prepare (or are
  legally required to prepare) your periodic tax returns. Royalty
  payments should be clearly marked as such and sent to the Project
  Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation at the address specified in
  Section 4, "Information about donations to the Project Gutenberg
  Literary Archive Foundation."

* You provide a full refund of any money paid by a user who notifies
  you in writing (or by e-mail) within 30 days of receipt that s/he
  does not agree to the terms of the full Project Gutenberg-tm
  License. You must require such a user to return or destroy all
  copies of the works possessed in a physical medium and discontinue
  all use of and all access to other copies of Project Gutenberg-tm
  works.

* You provide, in accordance with paragraph 1.F.3, a full refund of
  any money paid for a work or a replacement copy, if a defect in the
  electronic work is discovered and reported to you within 90 days of
  receipt of the work.

* You comply with all other terms of this agreement for free
  distribution of Project Gutenberg-tm works.

1.E.9. If you wish to charge a fee or distribute a Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic work or group of works on different terms than
are set forth in this agreement, you must obtain permission in writing
from both the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation and The
Project Gutenberg Trademark LLC, the owner of the Project Gutenberg-tm
trademark. Contact the Foundation as set forth in Section 3 below.

1.F.

1.F.1. Project Gutenberg volunteers and employees expend considerable
effort to identify, do copyright research on, transcribe and proofread
works not protected by U.S. copyright law in creating the Project
Gutenberg-tm collection. Despite these efforts, Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic works, and the medium on which they may be stored, may
contain "Defects," such as, but not limited to, incomplete, inaccurate
or corrupt data, transcription errors, a copyright or other
intellectual property infringement, a defective or damaged disk or
other medium, a computer virus, or computer codes that damage or
cannot be read by your equipment.

1.F.2. LIMITED WARRANTY, DISCLAIMER OF DAMAGES - Except for the "Right
of Replacement or Refund" described in paragraph 1.F.3, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation, the owner of the Project
Gutenberg-tm trademark, and any other party distributing a Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic work under this agreement, disclaim all
liability to you for damages, costs and expenses, including legal
fees. YOU AGREE THAT YOU HAVE NO REMEDIES FOR NEGLIGENCE, STRICT
LIABILITY, BREACH OF WARRANTY OR BREACH OF CONTRACT EXCEPT THOSE
PROVIDED IN PARAGRAPH 1.F.3. YOU AGREE THAT THE FOUNDATION, THE
TRADEMARK OWNER, AND ANY DISTRIBUTOR UNDER THIS AGREEMENT WILL NOT BE
LIABLE TO YOU FOR ACTUAL, DIRECT, INDIRECT, CONSEQUENTIAL, PUNITIVE OR
INCIDENTAL DAMAGES EVEN IF YOU GIVE NOTICE OF THE POSSIBILITY OF SUCH
DAMAGE.

1.F.3. LIMITED RIGHT OF REPLACEMENT OR REFUND - If you discover a
defect in this electronic work within 90 days of receiving it, you can
receive a refund of the money (if any) you paid for it by sending a
written explanation to the person you received the work from. If you
received the work on a physical medium, you must return the medium
with your written explanation. The person or entity that provided you
with the defective work may elect to provide a replacement copy in
lieu of a refund. If you received the work electronically, the person
or entity providing it to you may choose to give you a second
opportunity to receive the work electronically in lieu of a refund. If
the second copy is also defective, you may demand a refund in writing
without further opportunities to fix the problem.

1.F.4. Except for the limited right of replacement or refund set forth
in paragraph 1.F.3, this work is provided to you 'AS-IS', WITH NO
OTHER WARRANTIES OF ANY KIND, EXPRESS OR IMPLIED, INCLUDING BUT NOT
LIMITED TO WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTABILITY OR FITNESS FOR ANY PURPOSE.

1.F.5. Some states do not allow disclaimers of certain implied
warranties or the exclusion or limitation of certain types of
damages. If any disclaimer or limitation set forth in this agreement
violates the law of the state applicable to this agreement, the
agreement shall be interpreted to make the maximum disclaimer or
limitation permitted by the applicable state law. The invalidity or
unenforceability of any provision of this agreement shall not void the
remaining provisions.

1.F.6. INDEMNITY - You agree to indemnify and hold the Foundation, the
trademark owner, any agent or employee of the Foundation, anyone
providing copies of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works in
accordance with this agreement, and any volunteers associated with the
production, promotion and distribution of Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic works, harmless from all liability, costs and expenses,
including legal fees, that arise directly or indirectly from any of
the following which you do or cause to occur: (a) distribution of this
or any Project Gutenberg-tm work, (b) alteration, modification, or
additions or deletions to any Project Gutenberg-tm work, and (c) any
Defect you cause.

Section 2. Information about the Mission of Project Gutenberg-tm

Project Gutenberg-tm is synonymous with the free distribution of
electronic works in formats readable by the widest variety of
computers including obsolete, old, middle-aged and new computers. It
exists because of the efforts of hundreds of volunteers and donations
from people in all walks of life.

Volunteers and financial support to provide volunteers with the
assistance they need are critical to reaching Project Gutenberg-tm's
goals and ensuring that the Project Gutenberg-tm collection will
remain freely available for generations to come. In 2001, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation was created to provide a secure
and permanent future for Project Gutenberg-tm and future
generations. To learn more about the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation and how your efforts and donations can help, see
Sections 3 and 4 and the Foundation information page at
www.gutenberg.org

Section 3. Information about the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation

The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation is a non profit
501(c)(3) educational corporation organized under the laws of the
state of Mississippi and granted tax exempt status by the Internal
Revenue Service. The Foundation's EIN or federal tax identification
number is 64-6221541. Contributions to the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation are tax deductible to the full extent permitted by
U.S. federal laws and your state's laws.

The Foundation's principal office is in Fairbanks, Alaska, with the
mailing address: PO Box 750175, Fairbanks, AK 99775, but its
volunteers and employees are scattered throughout numerous
locations. Its business office is located at 809 North 1500 West, Salt
Lake City, UT 84116, (801) 596-1887. Email contact links and up to
date contact information can be found at the Foundation's web site and
official page at www.gutenberg.org/contact

For additional contact information:

    Dr. Gregory B. Newby
    Chief Executive and Director
    gbnewby@pglaf.org

Section 4. Information about Donations to the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation

Project Gutenberg-tm depends upon and cannot survive without wide
spread public support and donations to carry out its mission of
increasing the number of public domain and licensed works that can be
freely distributed in machine readable form accessible by the widest
array of equipment including outdated equipment. Many small donations
($1 to $5,000) are particularly important to maintaining tax exempt
status with the IRS.

The Foundation is committed to complying with the laws regulating
charities and charitable donations in all 50 states of the United
States. Compliance requirements are not uniform and it takes a
considerable effort, much paperwork and many fees to meet and keep up
with these requirements. We do not solicit donations in locations
where we have not received written confirmation of compliance. To SEND
DONATIONS or determine the status of compliance for any particular
state visit www.gutenberg.org/donate

While we cannot and do not solicit contributions from states where we
have not met the solicitation requirements, we know of no prohibition
against accepting unsolicited donations from donors in such states who
approach us with offers to donate.

International donations are gratefully accepted, but we cannot make
any statements concerning tax treatment of donations received from
outside the United States. U.S. laws alone swamp our small staff.

Please check the Project Gutenberg Web pages for current donation
methods and addresses. Donations are accepted in a number of other
ways including checks, online payments and credit card donations. To
donate, please visit: www.gutenberg.org/donate

Section 5. General Information About Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works.

Professor Michael S. Hart was the originator of the Project
Gutenberg-tm concept of a library of electronic works that could be
freely shared with anyone. For forty years, he produced and
distributed Project Gutenberg-tm eBooks with only a loose network of
volunteer support.

Project Gutenberg-tm eBooks are often created from several printed
editions, all of which are confirmed as not protected by copyright in
the U.S. unless a copyright notice is included. Thus, we do not
necessarily keep eBooks in compliance with any particular paper
edition.

Most people start at our Web site which has the main PG search
facility: www.gutenberg.org

This Web site includes information about Project Gutenberg-tm,
including how to make donations to the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation, how to help produce our new eBooks, and how to
subscribe to our email newsletter to hear about new eBooks.

